=head1 NAME

BBBikeRouting - frontend for using BBBike routing

=for category BBBike

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    use BBBikeRouting;
    my $routing = BBBikeRouting->new;
    $routing->init_context;
    $routing->Start->Street("from street");
    $routing->Goal->Street("from street");
    $routing->search;
    print @{ $routing->RouteInfo };

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This is a wrapper around L<Strassen.pm|Strassen.pm> to make simple
routing scripts easier. The basic approach is described as code in
L</SYNOPSIS> and looks as following:

=over 4

=item *

construct the C<BBBikeRouting> object

=item *

initialize the C<Context> member with C<init_context> and maybe change
some C<Context> parameters

=item *

set C<Start> and C<Goal> members

=item *

perform the route search

=item *

output the route information

=back

=head2 METHODS

=over 4

=item new

The constructor of C<BBBikeRouting> takes no arguments.

=item init_context

This method sets the C<Context> member to initial values (bike routing
in city scope. For the routing, maximum caching and speed (by using
the C variant of the A* algorithm) will be used. See L<"MEMBERS"> for a
list of C<Context> members.

=item search

Perform a search from the start to the goal position.

=item continue($position)

After a performed search, prepare the module to continue the existing
route using the $position (a C<BBBikeRouting::Position> object) as new
goal. The old goal is pushed to the C<Via> array. The actual search is
performed by calling search() again.

=item delete_to_last_via

The opposite of continue(). This method will delete the path and
routeinfo added by the last continue()/search() calls.

=back

=head2 MEMBERS

=over 4

=item C<Context>

Hold a C<BBBikeRouting::Context> object. The members of this object are:

=over 4

=item Vehicle

Can be C<pedestrian>, C<bike>, C<car> or C<oepnv> (public transport).

=item Velocity

The average speed in km/h. Default is 20 km/h.

=item Scope

Can be C<city> (only Berlin) or C<region> (Berlin and Brandenburg).

=item UseXS

Use the XS extension, if possible. This will speed up the net
creation.

=item UseCache

Use caches, if possible. This will speed up the creation of some
internal data structures.

=item UseNetServer

Use the net server started by the C<bbbikestrserver> script.
This can be used instead of the XS and Cache speedups.

=item SearchArgs

An array reference with more search arguments. See the
L<Strassen|Strassen> documentation for the method
C<StrassenNetz::search>.

=item Algorithm

The algorihm which should be used. Possible values are: C<srt> (an
ancient slower own search algorithm), C<A*> (a pure-perl
implementation of A*), or C<C-A*> (a C/perl combination of A*, only
available if the L<Inline::C|Inline::C> module is installed and a C
compiler is available).

=item CGI

Only for CGI scripts: the CGI query object.

=item BrowserInfo

Only for CGI scripts: the BrowserInfo object.

=item Verbose

Be verbose (output statistics to stderr etc.).

=back

=item C<Start>, C<Goal>

Hold C<BBBikeRouting::Position> objects for the start and goal
position. The members of this object are:

=over 4

=item Street

The street of the position (without house numbers).

=item Citypart

The citypart of the position.

=item Coord

The coordinate (standard coordinate system) of the position.

=item Multi

Not used now.

=back

=item RouteInfo

After finding a route, this member will contain an array reference of
the route "elements". Please refer to the
L<Strassen::StrassenNetz|Strassen::StrassenNetz> documentation for the
format of a route element.

=back

Other members of C<BBBikeRouting> are not meant for public use.

=head2 DATA FILES

It is assumed that data is available in a C<data> subdirectory of the
current script. The C<data/strassen> file is mandatory if routing on
streets is used (this is true for the vehicles C<pedestrian>, C<bike>
and C<car>), otherwise, for public transport, the files C<data/ubahn>
(for undergrounds) and C<data/sbahn> (for city railway) are used.

For public transport, also a file C<data/umsteigebhf> is needed for
railway junctions with different station names (e.g. in Berlin you can
change between "Rathaus Spandau" (U-Bahn) and "Spandau" (S-Bahn)).

For bike and car street routing, the file C<data/gesperrt> should
contain one-way streets, blocked streets, and blocked paths. Extra
blocked streets for cars only should be put into the file
C<data/gesperrt_car>. It is assumed that there are no blocked streets
for pedestrians at all.

=head1 AUTHOR

Slaven Rezic <slaven@rezic.de>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2001 Slaven Rezic. All rights reserved.
This module is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the same terms as Perl itself.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<bbbike>(1), L<Strassen>(3)
