=head1 NAME

bbd - bbbike data format description

=for category bbbike

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Sorry - parts of this documentation are still in German...

C<bbd> is a simple format for describing points and polylines for
geographic information systems.

Bbd files consist of newline-terminated records in the format:

    Name TAB Category SPACE x,y SPACE x,y ...

=head2 Coordinate lines (data lines)

=over

=item Name

A descriptive name, for example the street name, or (for attribute
layers) a description of the attribute category. This field must not
contain any TAB characters.

If there is a main name and a descriptive part, then the latter should
be separated by a C<|> character. This helps for intelligent
labelling, i.e. leaving out unimportant parts if necessary. Example:
B<Ringenwalde|(Uckermark)> could be labelled as B<Ringenwalde> or
B<Ringenwalde (Uckermark)>.

=item Category

The category of this point or polyline. If the category matches
C<#rrggbb> (where C<rr>, C<gg> and C<bb> are hexadecimal values), then
this denotes a color for the representation in the Perl/Tk interface.
A prefix of C<F:> denotes that the polyline should be treated as a
polygon and filled with a solid color. Note that the polygon is always
closed, but it is optional to make the first and last the same.

If the category matches I<forwardcat>C<;>I<backwardcat>, then
I<forwardcat> applies to the street in forward direction and
I<backwardcat> applies to the street in backward direction. Either
I<forwardcat> or I<backwardcat> may be empty; in this case the
category applies only to the other direction.

The B<X> category should be used if there is no category.

Other predefined categories are listed below. The category should not
contain any spaces.

   DRAFT (not yet in use!): Change the category format to:

       <cat> = <onewaycat> ; <onewaycat> |
               <onewaycat>

       <onewaycat> = F=? <basiccat> (: <attrkey> (= <attrval>)?)*

       <basiccat>  = [^:;]+
       <attrkey>   = [^:;=]+
       <attrval>   = [^:;=]+

   Changes for data files:
     F:cat becomes F=cat
     ?::inwork becomes ?:inwork
     F:SW|IMG:church.gif|ANCHOR:s becomes F=SW:IMG=church.gif:ANCHOR=s
   Maybe (no, too much typing):
     #rrggbb becomes X:COLOR=#rrggbb

   cat is now really attr. Reflect in description, maybe also in
   variable names.

=item x,y

A coordinate. x and y should be integer or float values. The datum and
grid of the coordinates should be handled by the software. It is
recommended that x and y should denote the easting and northing in
meters (as in GKK or UTM). A record may contain an unlimited number of
coordinates, though there may be limitations in the interpreting
software (currently the maximum number of points is hardcoded in
L<BBBikeXS> and checked in the rule C<check-line-lengths> of
F<data/Makefile>). See also below for the B<map> directive in
L</Directive lines>.

=back

=head2 Directive lines

If a line begines with a hash sign followed by a color (C<#:>), then
the line is treated as a directive. There are global directives, line
directives and block directives. Global directives should be specified
at top of the file before the first data line and should be separated
by the data lines with an empty directive line. Line directives are
valid for the next line only. Block directives are valid for the
specified block. Block directives are markes as such:

 #: directive_name directive_arguments ... vvv
 ... data lines
 #: directive_name ^^^

XXX make directive_name before ^^^ optional? XXX

The C<v> and C<^> markers could be repeated an indefinite number of
times, but at least three times.

An colon (:) after the directive_name is always optional.

=head3 Global directives

=over

=item C<type: I<bbd_type>>

This global directive sets the type of the bbd file. If given then it
should be put into the first line to serve as a kind of
E<quot>magicE<quot>. A possible type would be C<bbr> or C<bbbike
route>, once I get rid of the .bbr format.

=item C<map: I<maptype>>

This global directive sets the coordinate system of the bbd file. If
no C<map> directive is specified, then the proprietary bbbike
coordinate system is used. For WGS84 coordinates specified as DDD use
the maptype B<polar>.

=item C<title: I<title string>>

This global directive sets the title or some descriptive text for the
file.

=item C<version: I<RCS or CVS identifier string>>

This global directive introduces an RCS/CVS Id string.

=item C<encoding: I<encoding name>>

Treat this file as encoded in the given encoding (all names accepted
by Perl/Encode may be used). If not set, then iso-8859-1 is assumed.

The degree of support for encodings in bbbike.cgi and the Perl/Tk
implementation differs. iso-8859-1 is supported best. utf-8 is
considered to work in most, if not all places of the code. Other
encodings are at least known to NOT work with the XS implementation
for the fast street and point plotting. The pure perl implementation
is fine.

=item C<listing_sort: I<sort_method>>

Define a sorting method for street/point listings. Normally listings
will be sorted alphabetically (sort method B<alphabetic>). If the
listing should appear as in the bbd file, specify B<unsorted>.
B<natural> should be used for E<quot>naturalE<quot> sorting (see
L<Sort::Naturally>).

=back

=head3 Plotting hint directives

Plotting hint directives are used to control plotting of items. The
directives can only be set as global directives. The directives
explained below exist in two forms:

=over

=item C<I<directive>: ...>

The directive is valid for all items (unless overriden by per-category
directives).

=item C<I<directive>.I<category>: ...>

The directive is valid for items with the named I<category> (this
overrides directives without category specification).

=back

The list of plotting hint directives:

=over

=item C<line_color: I<color>>

=item C<line_color.I<category>: I<color>>

Define the color for line items. I<color> should be in the form
C<#rrggbb>.

Example:

 #: line_color: #808080
 #: line_color.cat: #ff8080

XXX: The category-less form is NYI!.
XXX: currently category_color.category is used instead of line_color.category

XXX: Maybe use C<item_color> instead of C<line_color>, because colors
apply also to points and areas!

XXX: Hmmm, it seems that str_color is (also?) in use, see
tmp/streets-accurate.bbd

=item C<line_width: I<width>>

=item C<line_width.I<category>: I<width>>

Define the width of line items.

XXX: The form with category is NYI!

XXX: Maybe this should make it possible to define widths for specific
zoom levels, like in the bbbike standard definitions.

=item C<line_length: I<length>>

=item C<line_length.I<category>: I<length>>

Define the length of line items. In the Perl/Tk interface this is
currently used for oneway and blocked symbols.

XXX: The form with category is NYI!

XXX: Maybe this should make it possible to define lengths for specific
zoom levels, like in the bbbike standard definitions.

=item C<line_dash: I<x, y, ...>>

=item C<line_dash.I<category>: I<x, y, ...>>

Define the default dash pattern for line items. See L<Tk::Canvas/DASH
PATTERNS> for the list integer syntax.

Example:

 #: line_dash: 1,1
 #: line_dash: 2,4

Compatibility: C<category_dash.I<category>> was formerly used instead
of C<line_dash.I<category>> and is still recognized, but will be
removed some day.

=item C<line_capstyle: I<capstyle>>

=item C<line_capstyle.I<category>: I<capstyle>>

Define the capstyle for line items. Valid values are C<butt>,
C<projecting>, or C<round> (see L<Tk::Canvas>).

XXX: Currently C<category_capstyle.category> is used instead of
C<line_capstyle.category>.

=item C<line_arrow: I<arrowspec>>

=item C<line_arrow.I<category>: I<arrowspec>>

Define whether arrows should be drawn on line items. Valid values
are C<none>, C<last>, C<first>, or C<both> (see L<Tk::Canvas>).

Example:

 #: line_arrow: last
 #: line_arrow.cat: both

=item C<line_shorten: I<boolean>>

=item C<line_shorten.I<category>: I<boolean>>

Define whether line items should be shortened on both ends.

XXX: Currently C<category_line_shorten.category> is used instead of
C<line_shorten.category>.

=item C<line_shorten_end: I<boolean>>

=item C<line_shorten_end.I<category>: I<boolean>>

Define whether line items should be shortened at the end.

XXX: Currently C<category_line_shorten_end.category> is used instead
of C<line_shorten_end.category>.

=item C<item_size: I<integer>>

=item C<item_size.I<category>: I<integer>>

Define the size of items (for example base label font size or the size
of point items in pixels).

XXX: The category-less form is NYI!
XXX: Currently C<category_size.category> is used instead
C<item_size.category>.

=item C<item_image: I<image_name>>

=item C<item_image.I<category>: I<image_name>>

Define an image for point items. The image name is usually without
suffix and will be searched in the default bbbike image directories,
if specified relative.

XXX: The category-less form is NYI!
XXX: Currently C<category_image.category> is used instead
C<item_image.category>.

=item C<item_stipple: I<image_name>>

=item C<item_stipple.I<category>: I<image_name>>

Define a stipple (which is usually an xbm image) for area items.

XXX: The category-less form is NYI!
XXX: Currently C<category_stipple.category> is used instead C<item_stipple.category>.

=item C<layer_stack: I<how>:I<tag>>

Define how the data should appear in the layer stacking order. I<how>
is either C<above> or C<below> and I<tag> is another layering tag used
in bbbike (some examples are C<s> for the street layer or C<w> for the
water layer --- consult the bbbike source, variable
C<@normal_stack_order> for more tags).

XXX This is experimental and likely to change!

=back

=head3 Line/block directives

=over

=item C<by: I<source>>

=item C<according_to: I<source>>

Denotes that the information in the next block or line was provided by
I<source>. This may be an email address or full name of an author, an
URL providing more information, a Message-Id of a mail or posting, a
date, or a combination of all. C<according_to:> is an alias for
C<by:>.

=item C<corrected_by: I<source> I<< previous -> current >> >

Used after a C<by> directive for a correction. It is advisable to put
the previous a small note of the previous and current entry after the
I<source>.

=item C<confirmed_by: I<source>>

Denotes that the information in the next block or line was confirmed
by I<source>.

=item C<unverified_by: I<source>>

Same as E<quot>by:E<quot> for unverified data.
E<quot>UnverifiedE<quot> means that there's no communication channel
back to the information provider.

=item C<temporary:>

The next block or line is just temporary. Typically the date
information is included in the Name field of the data line, preferred
in a ISO-date similar notation (e.g. YYYY-MM-DD - YYYY-MM-DD for a
starting and an end date).

=item C<XXX: I<why>>

The next block or line is unsure or unclear information. The I<why>
text specifies an additional comment. This note should not appear in
the processed data. 

Earlier versions also defined C<unsure> as an alias for C<XXX> (or
even the other way around), but in reality C<unsure> was almost never
used and also never considered in supporting scripts, so its use is
now deprecated.

=item C<XXX_checklater: I<why>>

Like C<XXX>, and additionally attach the E<quot>checklaterE<quot>
attribute.

NOTE: Currently it's not recommended to use this tag. It is better to
use just C<XXX> in conjunction with C<next_check> or C<last_checked>,
because the current infrastructure (supporting scripts etc.) have
better support for this.

=item C<XXX_prog: I<why>>

The next block or line contains problematic information due to
problems in the using programs, i.e. bbbike and bbbike.cgi.

For example this can be used if stacking information has to be given
using ordering in the data file, but bbbike should really have a
layer_stack attribute.

In the past it was also used for the cyclepath layer, because of
suboptimal rendering in points with large angles (more than 45° or
so). Here the layer item has to be broken into two items to fix the
rendering problem. But this is solved in bbbike since July 2009.

=item C<XXX_indoor: I<why>>

The unclear information can only be researched E<quot>indoorE<quot>,
and usually not on-site.

=item C<XXX_outdoor: I<why>>

The unclear information can only be researched on-site. Usually this
is the same as C<XXX>.

=item C<XXX_osm: I<why>>

An issue in OpenStreetMap data, e.g. incorrectly spelled street name
or wrong ways.

=item C<alias: I<name>>

Define another known name for the next line.

=item C<alias_wide: I<name>>

Special alias name to be used for E<quot>wide regionE<quot> routings.
In E<quot>inner cityE<quot> routing the real name should be used
instead.

Examples:

    #: alias_wide: Oranienburg - Bernau (B273)
    Bernauer Str. (B273)	B ...,...

=item C<name: I<lang>: I<name>>

The name in another language, specified by I<lang> in ISO 639 codes.

=item C<oldname: I<when>: I<name>>

An old name for the next line. I<when> is a time specification (best:
some kind of ISO dates, but this is not yet specified). Unknown dates
in I<when> should be marked with a question mark. Multiple oldname
directives are allowed for one record.

Examples:

    #: oldname: ?-20001001: Oldname street
    #: oldname: 20001001-2005: Not-so-old-name street

=item C<section: I<section name>>

The next block is part of a named section. Sections may be nested.

=item C<append_comment: I<comment>>

Useful for preprocessing bbd data files to add a comment to each
record in the block.

=item C<attributes: I<attribute>, ...>

=item C<attrs: I<attribute>, ...>

Define additional attributes for the following line or block. The
attributes may be used in a preprocessing script to generate
additional layers. C<attrs> is an alias for C<attributes>.

=item C<note: I<string>>

A free text note, which shouldn't (but may) appear in the processed
data.

=item C<see_also: I<string>>

A free text note, which refers to more information. This should be
typically a URL.

=item C<as_of: I<date>>

Last verified at the given date. The date should be in a ISO-8601-like
notation, with possible abbreviations: YYYY-MM-DD or YYYY-MM or YYYY.

=item C<url: I<string>>

An (official) URL referring to more information.

=item C<add_fragezeichen: I<string>>

Some postprocessing code may add the following line with the
descriptive text I<string> to the F<fragezeichen> file.

=back

=head3 Obsolete and to-be-decided directives

=over

=item C<internal_note: I<string>>

A free text note, which must not appear in the processed data. It is
just a note for editors.

Currently I think the C<XXX_...> is better suited for this task, as it
can give more specific information.

=back

=head2 Comment lines

If a line begins with a hash sign (C<#>), then it is treated as a
comment. Empty lines are ignored.

=head1 CATEGORIES

Here's a list of special categories:

=head2 STREETS

Used in files: F<strassen>, F<landstrassen>, F<landstrassen2>.
Usually F<strassen> is used for city streets, F<landstrassen> for
streets in the region around the city, and F<landstrassen2> for
streets in the wider region. But it is also possible to work only with
one file F<strassen>.

=over

=item BAB

Freeways (Bundesautobahn)

=item B

Bundesstraßen

=item HH

Important main streets (wichtige Hauptstraßen). Entspricht von der
Kfz-Dichte meist Bundesstraßen.

=item H

Main streets (Hauptstraßen)

=item N

Nebenstraßen

=item NN

Für Kfz gesperrte Straßen.

=item Pl

Places (Plätze).

=item Br

Bridges.

=back

=head2 BLOCKINGS

Used in files: F<gesperrt>, F<gesperrt_car>. F<gesperrt> is usually
used for blocked streets relevant for cyclists, while F<gesperrt_car>
is for blocked streets for motorized vehicles.

=over

=item * C<1>:

One way street. The blocking is in the direction of the polyline.

=item * C<1s>:

One way street (read E<quot>one softE<quot>), but not strictly for
cyclists (means: It is non-legally possible to pass the street in the
wrong direction. Typically this will cause the routing to add a
handicap of class C<q4> for the wrong direction.).

=item * C<1h>:

One way street 8read E<quot>one hardE<quot>), and there's no
possibility for a cyclist to use the street in wrong direction.

=item * C<2>:

Blocked street in both directions.

=item * C<0>:

The bicycle has to be carried. An optional penalty parameter expressed
in seconds of lost time may be added after the category, with a C<:>
as separator. Example: C<0:30> for a penalty of 30 seconds. This is
only for point records.

=item * C<3>:

A blocked route (gesperrte Wegführung). This means that the whole path
specified by the coordinates of this record are blocked, but parts of
the path are not.

=item * C<3nocross>:

Mark a street or street section which cannot be crossed. This category
is currently only used by the F<miscsrc/convert2hafas> conversion
script (the preprocessor of the F<*-orig> files to the real bbd
files). The conversion script generates a couple of blocked routes
with the category C<3>.

=item * C<BNP>:

A narrow passage (E<quot>DrE<auml>ngelgitterE<quot> etc.). An optional
penalty parameter may be added, like for the C<0> category.

=back

=head2 CYCLE PATHS (RADWEGE)

Used in files: F<radwege_exact>.

=over

=item C<RW0>

Kein Radweg.

=item C<RW1>

Normaler nicht benutzungspflichtiger Radweg.

=item C<RW2>

Benutzungspflichtiger Radweg.

=item C<RW3>

Suggestivstreifen für Radfahrer.

=item C<RW4>

Radstreifen.

=item C<RW5>

Busspur (eventuell nur temporär), auch für Radfahrer frei.

=item C<RW6>

Verkehrsberuhigte Straße.

=item C<RW7>

Fahrradstraße.

=item C<RW8>

Benutzungspflichtiger Zweirichtungsradweg, Gegenrichtung.

=item C<RW9>

Nicht benutzungspflichtiger Zweirichtungsradweg, Gegenrichtung.

=item C<RW10>

Hauptstraße mit zusätzlichem Nebenstreifen, aber auch von Kfz nutzbar
(Beispiele in Berlin: Heerstr., Unter den Eichen am Botanischen
Garten).

=item C<RW>

Radweg vorhanden, aber nicht weiter kategorisiert.

=back

=head2 RAILROADS

Used in files: F<ubahn>, F<sbahn>, F<rbahn>, F<ubahnhof>, F<sbahnhof>,
F<rbahnhof>.

=over

=item C<R>

Regionalbahnen außerhalb des Stadtgebiets.

=item C<RA>

Regionalbahnen Zone A.

=item C<RB>

Regionalbahnen Zone B.

=item C<RC>

Regionalbahnen Zone C.

=item C<R0>

Regionalbahnen außer Betrieb oder ohne regelmäßigen Betrieb.

=item C<RBau>

Regionalbahnen in Bau.

=item C<RG>

Güterbahnen, Verbindungskurven.

=item C<RP>

Parkbahnen, Kleinbahnen.

=item C<S>

S-Bahnen außerhalb des Stadtgebiets.

=item C<SA>

S-Bahnen Zone A.

=item C<SB>

S-Bahnen Zone B.

=item C<SC>

S-Bahnen Zone C.

=item C<S0>

S-Bahnen außer Betrieb.

=item C<SBau>

S-Bahnlinien in Bau.

=item C<U>

U-Bahnen außerhalb des Stadtgebiets.

=item C<UA>

U-Bahnen Zone A.

=item C<UB>

U-Bahnen Zone B.

=item C<UC>

U-Bahnen Zone C.

=item C<U0>

U-Bahnen außer Betrieb.

=item C<UBau>

U-Bahnlinien in Bau.

=back

=head2 QUALITY

Qualität der Wege (Fahrbahnbeschaffenheit).

Used in files: F<quality_s>, F<quality_l>. F<quality_s> is usually
used for city streets, while F<quality_l> is for streets in the region
around the city.

=over

=item C<Q0>

Beste Qualität, keine Einschränkungen.

=item C<Q1>

Gute Kopfsteinpflasterstrecken, mäßiger Asphalt, etwa 25 km/h
Höchstgeschwindigkeit.

=item C<Q2>

Gewöhnliche Kopfsteinpflasterstrecken, schlechter Asphalt, Waldwege,
etwa 18 km/h Höchstgeschwindigkeit.

=item C<Q3>

Schlechte Kopfsteinpflasterstrecken, sandige Strecken, etwa 13 km/h
Höchstgeschwindigkeit.

=back

Es ist möglich, eine Tendenz mit einem angehängten C<-> (besser) oder
C<+> (schlechter) anzugeben, also beispielsweise C<Q2+> für eine
mäßige Qualität mit Tendenz zur guten Qualität. Diese Tendenzen werden
bislang nur bei der Erfassung verwendet, aber (noch) nicht beim
Routing oder der Kartendarstellung.

Andere, nicht fahrbahnbezogene Handicaps, zum Beispiel Beeinträchtigungen
durch Fußgänger oder enge Kurven. Used in files: F<handicap_s> (used
for city streets), F<handicap_l> (used for streets in the region
around the city).

=over

=item C<q0>

Keine.

=item C<q1>

Auf 25 km/h.

=item C<q2>

Auf 18 km/h.

=item C<q3>

Auf 13 km/h.

=item C<q4>

Auf Schrittgeschwidigkeit (z.B. in FuE<szlig>gE<auml>ngerzonen).

=back

=head2 COMMENTS

Used in files: F<comments_cyclepath> (alternative way to attribute
cyclepaths), F<comments_ferry> (e.g. time-tables or fares of ferries),
F<comments_kfzverkehr> (categorized amount of motorized traffic -
Abschätzung des Kfz-Verkehrs), F<comments_misc> (other comments),
F<comments_mount> (mounts with grades - Steigungen), F<comments_path>
(path instructions), F<comments_route> (numbered cycle routes -
ausgeschilderte Fahrradrouten), F<comments_tram> (tramway on street).

=over

=item C<CP;>

Only for records with three points. Comment is valid for point B if
driving from A to C.

=item C<CP2;>

Only for records with two points. Comment is valid for point A if
driving from A to B.

=item C<CP>

Same as C<CP;>, but valid for both directions.

=item C<CP2>

Same as C<CP2;>, but valid for both directions.

=item C<CS;>

Comment is valid for the whole route in this direction.

=item C<CS>

Comment is valid for the whole route in both directions.

=item C<PI;>

Path instruction (genauere Wegbeschreibung). (This is in fact a
generalisation of C<CP2;> allowing more than two points)

=item C<P0>

Dieser Weg ist gesperrt (z.B. Abbiegen nicht möglich), aber eine
Umfahrung ist möglich ... siehe auch Kategorie C<3> in L</BLOCKINGS>.

NB: Diese Kategorie wird bislang noch nicht verwendet und bedarf
deswegen einer Überprüfung.

=item C<-2> relativ ruhiger Kfz-Verkehr

=item C<-1>

=item C<+1>

=item C<+2> relativ starker Kfz-Verkehr

Relativ zu der Kategorie einer Straße (von Nebenstraße C<NN> bis zur
Bundesstraße C<B>) kann das subjektive Empfinden der Kfz-Dichte mit
C<-2> bis C<+2> angepasst werden.

=back

=head2 AREAS

Used in files: F<flaechen>. Mostly prefixed with C<F:>, see above.

=over

=item C<P>

Parks.

=item C<Forest>

Forests.

=item C<Cemetery>

Cemeteries.

=item C<Ae>

Airports.

=item C<Orchard>

Orchards; especially allotments (Kleingärten).

=item C<Sport>

Sports fields.

=item C<Industrial>

Industrial area.

=item C<Mine>

Mining, surface mining (Tagebau).

=back

=head2 CITIES AND PLACES

The category interval span from C<0> to C<6> where C<0> denotes city
parts, C<1> villages and C<6> metropolises.

=head2 MISC

=over

=item C<radroute>

Haupt- oder Freizeitrouten.

=item C<Q>

Fähren.

=item C<X>

The category will not be used in this case.

=back

=head2 OTHER STANDARD FILES

=over

=item ampeln

File with point records for traffic lights (Ampeln). The category is
set to B<B> for railroad crossings, B<B0> for railroad crossing
without frequent traffic, B<F> for pedestrian-only traffic lights and
B<Zbr> for drawbridges, otherwise not used.

=item hoehe

File with elevation points. The C<Name> fields denotes the elevation
in meters, the category is not used.

=item sehenswuerdigkeit

File with sights, public buildings and other E<quot>interestingE<quot>
points. Possible categories are

=over

=item C<SW>

Unspecified sight. Use if nothing else applies.

=item C<Shop>

A shopping center.

=back

The category has usually an image attribute. The following standard
images are available in bbbike:

=over

=item C<museum>

=item C<theater>

=item C<church>

=item C<synagogue>

=item C<mosque>

=item C<airport>

=item C<hospital>

=item C<monument>

=item C<touristinfo>

=back

The pseudo image C<px_1t> may be used for invisible areas.

In area records, it is advisable to use the main entrance as the first
point.

=back

XXX To be continued

=head1 ATTRIBUTES

=over

=item inwork

Marks the map item to be E<quot>in workE<quot>. This could be rendered
with an additional E<quot>in workE<quot> sign along the map item. This
attribute is already handled in a couple of data files
(F<fragezeichen>, F<gesperrt>, F<handicap>, F<strassen_bab>).

=item Tu

The map item is in a tunnel. This is already handled in F<sbahn>,
F<rbahn> and F<strassen_bab>.

=item Tu_

The map item is in a tunnel and a tunnel mound should only be drawn at the
beginning of the map item.

=item _Tu

The map item is in a tunnel and a tunnel mound should only be drawn at
the end of the map item.

=item _Tu_

The map item is in a tunnel and no tunnel mounds should be drawn at
all.

=item Br

The map item is on a bridge. This is already handled in
F<strassen_bab>.

=item Eb

The map item is on an embankment (Bahn- oder Straßendamm). This means
that the map item is typically over other map items. The attribute is
not used yet.

=item Cu

The map item is in a cutting (Einschnitt). This means that the map
item is typically under other map items. The attribute is not used
yet.

=item igndisp

Ignore display. Item will not be rendered, but may be used for other
purposes (i.e. routing). See L</ignrte>.

=item ignrte

Ignore in routing. Item will not be used in routing, but may be used
for other purposes (i.e. display). See L</igndisp>.

=item

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

    #: map: polar
    # a comment
    Dudenstr.	H 13.3857982559056,52.4850047136888 13.3822671967909,52.4849893166144 13.3765591649622,52.4849797043717 13.3721313913775,52.4849830887141 13.3708964575072,52.4850055627098
    Viktoriapark	F:P 13.3770529147335,52.4891642850551 13.376956820767,52.4876188211697 13.3778829456197,52.4875997186591

And a detailed explanation...

    Start of a directive
    v
    #: map: polar
       ^
       Coordinate system of this file is defined as WGS84, DDD

    Start of a comment
    v
    # a comment

(Note that spaces are insignificant in the following examples, but
C<< <TAB> >> and C<< <SPACE> >> should be inserted)
    
                              List of coordinates (x,y pairs)
                              v
    Dudenstr. <TAB> H <SPACE> 13.3857982559056,52.4850047136888 13.3822671967909,52.4849893166144 13.3765591649622,52.4849797043717 13.3721313913775,52.4849830887141 13.3708964575072,52.4850055627098
    ^               ^
    Street name     Category (H = main street)

                                   List of coordinates for a polygon
                                   v
    Viktoriapark <TAB> F:P <SPACE> 13.3770529147335,52.4891642850551 13.376956820767,52.4876188211697 13.3778829456197,52.4875997186591
    ^                  ^
    Name of a park     Category (F = area (polygon, Fläche),
                                 P = park)

                    Category (S = S-Bahn, A = Tariff area A)
                    v
    S1,S2,S25 <TAB> SA::Tu_ <SPACE> coordinates ...
                        ^
                        Attribute (Tunnel, only draw tunnel entrance
                                   at beginning)

=head1 CAVEATS

Some category values may change. It is likely that either the blocking
and/or city category values will change, as both use digits.

=head1 AUTHOR

Slaven Rezic <slaven@rezic.de>

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<bbbike>, L<Strassen>.

